Research Notebook
Project

Active Learning for Drug Discovery

Goal
Investigate whether active learning strategies can reduce the number of experiments required to build an accurate predictive model for molecular activity.


26/06/2026

Entry 0 — Initial hypotheses
Biological motivation

Experimental assays are expensive.

Given a large library of molecules, only a small fraction can be tested.

Machine learning can guide which molecules should be tested next.


Research question

Which active-learning strategy provides the best use of a limited experimental budget?

Initial hypotheses
Greedy selection should discover more active molecules.
Uncertainty sampling should build a better predictive model.
Random sampling should provide a useful baseline.


Entry 1 — Simulation design
Important conceptual distinction

The labels already exist.

The model simply does not know them yet.

When a molecule is selected,

unknown label
        ↓
experimental assay
        ↓
true label becomes available

The simulation reproduces this process by hiding labels and revealing them only after selection.


Experimental workflow

One active-learning round is equivalent to one experimental campaign:

Current labeled molecules
↓
Train model
↓
Predict unlabeled molecules
↓
Choose experiments
↓
Reveal true labels
↓
Repeat


Entry 2 — Selection strategies

We implemented three strategies.

Random
No model guidance.
Purpose:
Baseline.

Greedy
Choose molecules with the largest P(active)
Purpose:
Maximize hit discovery.

Uncertainty
Choose molecules with P(active) ≈ 0.5
Purpose:
Improve the model by labeling molecules close to its decision boundary.


Entry 3 — First experiment

Configuration

Toy dataset
Logistic Regression
20 initial labeled molecules
10 molecules selected per round
10 rounds

Evaluation

ROC AUC on a fixed test set
Number of active molecules discovered
Observation

Greedy clearly discovered more active molecules.

Greedy:       97

Random:       62

Uncertainty:  62

This confirmed our first hypothesis.

Unexpected observation:

Random achieved a ROC AUC comparable to, or better than, uncertainty sampling.

This contradicted our initial expectation.


Entry 4 — Discussion

Possible explanations

H1
The initial model is too inaccurate.
Uncertainty sampling may focus on the wrong region.

H2
The toy dataset is relatively easy.
Random exploration already samples enough informative molecules.

H3
Pure uncertainty oversamples one small region of feature space.
Random explores a larger fraction of the feature space.

H4
The observation may simply be due to randomness.
One simulation is insufficient.

H5
Pure uncertainty sampling may become trapped near the current decision boundary 
if the initial labeled dataset poorly represents the feature space.
Prediction:
Increasing the diversity of the initial labeled molecules should improve uncertainty sampling.

Next experiments

Repeat the entire simulation across many independent random seeds.
Measure mean ROC AUC ± standard deviation for each strategy.

Use random initialization to evaluate hypothesis H5.


Lessons learned:
Unexpected results should not immediately be interpreted as implementation bugs. 
They are hypotheses that require further experiments.



Entry 5 — Long Simulation (50 Independent Campaigns)
Objective

Evaluate whether different active-learning strategies produce measurable differences in 
model performance and hit discovery when averaged across many independent experimental campaigns.

Experimental Design

Dataset
-Synthetic 2D molecular dataset
-1000 molecules
-Binary classification (active/inactive)

Model
-Logistic Regression

Active-learning setup
-Initial labeled molecules: 20

Molecules selected per round: 10

Total rounds: 10

Selection strategies
-Random
-Greedy (highest predicted probability)
-Uncertainty (least confident predictions)

Evaluation metrics

-Primary metric: ROC AUC on a fixed held-out test set

-Secondary metric: Number of experimentally discovered active molecules

-Repetitions: 50 independent simulations using different random seeds.

Results

Hit discovery:
-Greedy overwhelmingly outperformed the other strategies.

Average number of active molecules after 10 rounds:

Strategy	Actives Found
Greedy	~100
Random	~63
Uncertainty	~64

This confirms the expected behavior of an exploitative strategy.

-Model performance

Average ROC AUC after 10 rounds:

Strategy	ROC AUC
Random	0.819 ± 0.019
Uncertainty	0.817 ± 0.020
Greedy	0.805 ± 0.028

Contrary to our initial hypothesis, uncertainty sampling did not substantially outperform random sampling.

The difference between Random and Uncertainty is very small compared to the observed variability.

-Visual Analysis

The 2D visualizations provided an intuitive explanation of the numerical results.

--Greedy

The model rapidly concentrated experiments inside the active region.

Characteristics:

Excellent hit discovery.
Very limited exploration.
Quickly exploits its current knowledge.

--Random

Experiments naturally covered the entire feature space.

Characteristics:

Representative sampling of the data distribution.
Balanced discovery of active and inactive molecules.
Strong predictive performance despite its simplicity.

--Uncertainty

Experiments concentrated around the current decision boundary.

Characteristics:

Repeated refinement of ambiguous regions.
Limited exploration outside the current boundary.
Behaves more like boundary refinement than true exploration.

This visualization substantially changed our interpretation of uncertainty sampling.

Lessons Learned
Unexpected results should not immediately be interpreted as implementation errors.
Visualization is essential for understanding active-learning behavior.
Negative experiments (inactive molecules) are still valuable because they improve the predictive model.
Different active-learning strategies optimize different objectives:
Greedy optimizes hit discovery.
Random builds representative datasets.
Uncertainty refines the decision boundary.


New Hypotheses
H1 — Initialization Bias ⭐⭐⭐

The performance of active learning depends strongly on the quality of the initial labeled molecules.
Random initialization may produce an unrepresentative starting dataset, influencing every subsequent
iteration.

Prediction
A more diverse initialization should improve uncertainty sampling.

H2 — Sampling Redundancy ⭐⭐

Pure uncertainty sampling repeatedly selects neighboring molecules.

Prediction
Combining uncertainty with a diversity criterion should improve model performance.

H3 — Dataset Complexity ⭐

The toy dataset may be too simple to reveal the advantages of uncertainty sampling.

Prediction
More complex datasets will increase the differences between strategies.

H4 — Model Capacity ⭐

Logistic Regression may already learn an almost optimal decision boundary.

Prediction
More expressive models (e.g., Random Forest or Gradient Boosting) may benefit more from active learning.


Immediate Next Step

Investigate the influence of the initial labeled pool.

Implement and compare alternative initialization strategies while keeping:

-the dataset,
-the classifier,
-and the active-learning strategy

unchanged.

This isolates the effect of initialization from all other variables.

Project Roadmap

I think we now have a clear roadmap, ordered by scientific importance rather than implementation difficulty.

Phase 1 (Current)
Initialization strategies ⭐⭐⭐

Question: Does the choice of the initial experimental set influence the effectiveness of active learning?

Compare:

-Random initialization (baseline)
-Diverse initialization (our first improvement)

Phase 2
Selection redundancy ⭐⭐

Question: Can uncertainty sampling be improved by explicitly encouraging diversity?

Potential approaches:

-Uncertainty + diversity
-Clustering
-Distance-based penalties

Phase 3
Model complexity ⭐⭐

Question: Does a more expressive machine learning model change the relative performance of the 
active-learning strategies?

Candidates:

-Random Forest
-Gradient Boosting
-XGBoost (optional)

Phase 4
Real molecular datasets ⭐⭐⭐

Replace the synthetic dataset with molecular fingerprints.

At this stage we will also address:

-scaffold-aware splitting,
-chemical diversity,
-and potential data leakage.



29/06/2026

Entry 6 — Effect of the Initial Experimental Design
Objective
Investigate whether the composition of the initial labeled pool influences the subsequent 
active-learning campaign.

The underlying hypothesis is that a more representative initial dataset produces a better first 
classifier, leading to improved acquisition decisions throughout the campaign.

Experimental Design
The previous experiment used a random initialization of the labeled pool.

A second initialization strategy was implemented:

-Random initialization
The initial labeled molecules are selected uniformly at random.

This represents a typical experimental campaign where no prior knowledge is available.

-Diverse initialization
The initial labeled molecules are selected using greedy farthest-point sampling.

At each iteration, the molecule maximizing the minimum distance from the already selected 
molecules is added to the labeled pool.

This strategy aims to maximize coverage of the feature space before active learning begins.

All other components of the pipeline remained unchanged:
-Synthetic dataset
-Logistic Regression classifier
-20 initial labeled molecules
-10 acquisition rounds
-50 independent simulations

Results
-Predictive performance
The effect of initialization was measurable but modest.

Greedy selection benefited the most from a diverse initialization, showing an increase 
in average ROC AUC.

Random selection showed virtually no change.

Uncertainty sampling exhibited a small improvement in predictive performance.

Overall, the observed improvements remained comparable to the variability across independent simulations.

-Active molecule discovery
Greedy continued to identify the largest number of active molecules regardless of the 
initialization strategy.

Random selection showed a slight increase in discovered active molecules under diverse initialization.

Interestingly, uncertainty sampling discovered slightly fewer active molecules despite achieving 
a marginally higher ROC AUC.

This suggests that improving model calibration does not necessarily maximize hit discovery.

-Visual Analysis
Visual inspection of the campaigns revealed that the qualitative behavior of each acquisition 
strategy remained unchanged.

Random selection continued to explore the feature space broadly.

Greedy rapidly converged toward the active region.

Uncertainty sampling concentrated experiments around the estimated decision boundary.

The main observable difference between the two initialization strategies was a shift in the 
initial decision boundary learned by the classifier.

This altered the early acquisition trajectory without fundamentally changing the long-term 
behavior of the algorithms.

In particular, uncertainty sampling explored a slightly larger portion of the inactive region
when initialized with a more diverse set of molecules.

This effect is likely generated during the first few acquisition rounds, where the classifier 
is still strongly influenced by the initial experimental design.

-Interpretation
The initialization strategy influences the starting point of the active-learning campaign.

However, on this relatively simple synthetic dataset, its influence is limited.

The acquisition strategy itself remains the dominant factor governing the overall behavior of the campaign.

This negative result is informative.

Although diverse initialization provides a small benefit, the improvement alone does not appear 
sufficient to justify a substantially more complex initialization procedure.

Lessons Learned
Initialization affects the first classifier, which influences all subsequent acquisition decisions.

Different acquisition strategies exhibit different sensitivities to initialization.

Improvements in predictive performance do not necessarily correspond to increased hit discovery.

Visual analysis is essential for understanding why quantitative metrics change.

New Hypothesis
H2 — Diversity-Aware Uncertainty Sampling
Pure uncertainty sampling repeatedly selects molecules located near the current decision boundary.

Many of these molecules are highly similar and therefore provide partially redundant information.

Instead of selecting the most uncertain molecules directly, uncertainty sampling may first identify 
a pool of highly uncertain candidates and then prioritize structurally diverse molecules among them.

This approach may preserve the benefits of uncertainty sampling while reducing redundancy and 
improving exploration.

Next Experiment
Implement a diversity-aware uncertainty strategy.

Pipeline:
Rank all unlabeled molecules according to uncertainty.
Keep only the most uncertain candidates.
Select a diverse subset using a distance-based criterion.
Compare the resulting campaign with standard uncertainty sampling.
The objective is to determine whether explicitly encouraging diversity improves predictive 
performance, hit discovery, or both.


Entry 7 — Diversity-Aware Uncertainty Sampling
Objective
Test whether uncertainty sampling can be improved by explicitly reducing redundancy among 
selected molecules.

The motivation came from visual inspection of standard uncertainty sampling, which repeatedly 
selected neighboring molecules along the decision boundary.

Experimental Design
A new acquisition strategy was implemented:

uncertainty_topk
Selects the k molecules closest to P(active) = 0.5.

This is pure boundary refinement.

uncertainty_diverse
Rank unlabeled molecules by uncertainty.

Keep the most uncertain candidate pool.

Select a diverse subset from that pool using farthest-point sampling.

This asks:

Among uncertain molecules, which subset best covers the uncertain region?

Results
Random initialization
Strategy	ROC AUC	Actives
uncertainty_topk	0.811 ± 0.032	64.5
uncertainty_diverse	0.814 ± 0.031	63.5
￼
Diversity-aware uncertainty slightly improved ROC AUC while discovering approximately the same number of active molecules.

Diverse initialization
Strategy	ROC AUC	Actives
uncertainty_topk	0.815 ± 0.031	60.2
uncertainty_diverse	0.814 ± 0.031	60.3
￼
With diverse initialization, both uncertainty strategies performed almost identically.

-Visual Analysis
The visual comparison was more informative than the numerical difference.

uncertainty_topk selected a dense strip of points near the decision boundary.

uncertainty_diverse selected points spread more evenly along the boundary.

This confirms that the new strategy changed the acquisition behavior in the intended direction.

-Interpretation
Diversity-aware uncertainty successfully reduced sampling redundancy.

However, the performance improvement remained small on the toy dataset.

The effect was clearer under random initialization, suggesting that diverse initialization and diversity-aware acquisition may partially address the same problem: insufficient coverage of feature space.

This supports the idea that initialization and acquisition strategies interact rather than acting independently.

-Decision
We will not tune candidate_pool_size on the toy dataset.

Reason:

Optimizing this hyperparameter now would risk overfitting to the geometry of the synthetic 2D system.

Instead, the current implementation will be frozen and tested on real molecular data.

Next Step
Replace the toy 2D dataset with real molecules.

Planned transition:
toy features
↓
SMILES
↓
Morgan fingerprints
↓
same active-learning framework
The next research question is: Does diversity-aware uncertainty remain useful in chemical feature space?



30/06/2026


Entry 8 — Transition from Toy Data to Real Molecular Data
-Objective

Validate the active learning framework on a real drug discovery dataset.

The synthetic 2D dataset provided a controlled environment to verify the implementation and understand 
the behavior of different acquisition strategies. The next step was to determine whether the same 
observations hold in a realistic cheminformatics setting.

-Dataset

Target:
EGFR (BindingDB)

Dataset characteristics:
750 molecules
Binary activity labels
Morgan fingerprints (radius = 2, 2048 bits)
Active fraction ≈ 0.79

The relatively high proportion of active compounds makes hit discovery easier than in typical 
HTS datasets, but still provides a realistic benchmark for comparing acquisition strategies.

-Feature representation

Each molecule was converted from its canonical SMILES representation into a Morgan fingerprint using RDKit.

Fingerprint parameters:
Radius = 2
Length = 2048 bits

Morgan fingerprints were selected because they are a standard molecular representation for 
ligand-based machine learning and are computationally efficient.

-Experiment

The same framework developed on the toy system was reused without modification.

Acquisition strategies:

Random
Greedy
Uncertainty Top-K
Uncertainty + Diversity

Initialization strategies:

Random
Diverse

Evaluation:

50 repeated simulations
ROC AUC
Number of active molecules discovered
Results

Unlike the toy dataset, the improvement obtained by diversity-aware uncertainty became much more evident.

Example (random initialization):

Strategy	ROC AUC
Uncertainty Top-K	~0.938
Uncertainty + Diversity	~0.955

A similar improvement was observed with diverse initialization.

-Interpretation

The effect of diversity-aware uncertainty appears considerably stronger in realistic molecular 
feature space than in the synthetic 2D dataset.

This supports the hypothesis that reducing redundancy among uncertain molecules improves model 
learning when fingerprints represent complex chemical structures.

-Conclusions

The active learning framework successfully generalized from synthetic data to real molecular data.

The implementation remained unchanged, demonstrating that the framework is independent of the 
feature generation pipeline.

Research Notebook


Entry 9 — Exploring Chemical Space
Objective

Complement quantitative metrics with visual analysis of the molecular dataset.

Rather than evaluating active learning solely through ROC AUC, investigate how different 
strategies explore chemical space.

PCA
Principal Component Analysis was applied to the Morgan fingerprints.

Three principal components were retained.

The following projections were analyzed:

PC1 vs PC2
PC1 vs PC3
PC2 vs PC3

A cumulative explained variance plot was also generated.

UMAP
A nonlinear UMAP projection was computed using the Jaccard metric, which is more appropriate for 
binary Morgan fingerprints than Euclidean distance.

UMAP aims to preserve local neighborhoods in chemical space and provides a complementary view to PCA.

Descriptor Space
In addition to abstract fingerprint projections, a descriptor-based representation was introduced.

Descriptors computed from RDKit:

Molecular Weight
LogP
TPSA
Hydrogen Bond Donors
Hydrogen Bond Acceptors
Rotatable Bonds
Ring Count
Fraction Csp3

The first descriptor visualization uses:
Molecular Weight vs TPSA

This provides an interpretable physicochemical view of the dataset.

Informative Panel

A comprehensive visualization panel was developed containing:

Active learning campaigns
PCA projections
UMAP projection
Descriptor space
PCA explained variance
Dataset summary

The objective is to summarize the complete experiment in a single publication-quality figure.

Interpretation

PCA and UMAP provide complementary information.

PCA highlights the dominant directions of variation within the fingerprints.

UMAP reveals local chemical neighborhoods that are not visible through linear projections.

Descriptor space adds physicochemical interpretability to the learned molecular representations.

Conclusions

Chemical-space visualization has become an integral part of the active learning workflow.
Rather than only measuring predictive performance, the framework now allows interpretation of 
where different acquisition strategies explore the molecular landscape.

Research Notebook
Entry 10 — Preparing Query by Committee
Motivation

The uncertainty-based acquisition strategies developed so far rely on a single predictive model.
For a logistic regression classifier, uncertainty is defined as:
Probability close to the decision boundary.
However, a single model may be confidently wrong.
This motivated the exploration of committee-based uncertainty.

Scientific Question
Rather than asking

"Is one model uncertain?"

ask

"Do several different models disagree?"

This distinction introduces a different notion of uncertainty based on disagreement between 
independent hypotheses.

Committee Composition

The initial committee consists of three complementary classifiers:

Logistic Regression
Random Forest
Gradient Boosting

These models were selected because they were already used throughout the BindingDB activity 
prediction project and exhibit different inductive biases.

Disagreement Measure

For each unlabeled molecule, every committee member predicts:

P(active)

The disagreement score is defined as the variance of these predicted probabilities.

High variance indicates strong disagreement between models and identifies molecules that are 
expected to be particularly informative if experimentally tested.

Future Extensions

The current implementation deliberately focuses on pure disagreement.

Additional committee-based acquisition strategies may later be explored:

Committee boundary uncertainty (mean probability near 0.5)
Hybrid disagreement + boundary uncertainty
Vote entropy
Bayesian committees

The current implementation serves as a clean baseline against which these extensions can be compared.


Entry 11 — Query by Committee on BindingDB EGFR
Objective
Test whether a committee of different classifiers can provide a useful alternative definition of uncertainty.

Instead of selecting molecules close to the decision boundary of a single model, Query by Committee 
selects molecules where multiple models disagree.

Motivation
Previous acquisition strategies used Logistic Regression as the only predictive model.

For uncertainty-based selection, uncertainty was defined as:

P(active) ≈ 0.5

Query by Committee uses a different principle:

Molecules are informative when different models make different predictions.

Committee Design
The committee contained three classifiers:

Logistic Regression

Random Forest

Gradient Boosting

For each unlabeled molecule, each model predicted P(active).

The disagreement score was computed as the variance of predicted probabilities across the three models.

Results
At round 10, Query by Committee performed better than uncertainty_topk, but worse than uncertainty_diverse.

Initialization	Strategy	ROC AUC	Actives found
Random	uncertainty_topk	0.938 ± 0.030	68.5
Random	query_by_committee	0.944 ± 0.021	71.6
Random	uncertainty_diverse	0.955 ± 0.024	70.2
Diverse	uncertainty_topk	0.943 ± 0.025	67.0
Diverse	query_by_committee	0.942 ± 0.028	71.5
Diverse	uncertainty_diverse	0.956 ± 0.023	68.8
￼
Diagnostic Analysis
A dedicated Query by Committee diagnostic plot was generated at round 0.

It included:

PCA colored by committee disagreement

UMAP colored by committee disagreement

Histogram of disagreement scores

QBC-selected molecules projected on PCA space

The histogram showed that most molecules had disagreement close to zero.

Only a small minority of molecules exhibited substantial disagreement.

Interpretation
The committee members largely agreed across the dataset.

This explains why Query by Committee did not behave dramatically differently from single-model 
uncertainty sampling.

The result suggests that, for EGFR, the classification problem may be relatively easy for 
standard fingerprint-based models.

Possible reasons:

The dataset is strongly biased toward active molecules.

Morgan fingerprints encode enough information for several model classes to learn similar boundaries.

EGFR may not be a sufficiently challenging target to reveal the full benefit of committee disagreement.

Conclusion
Query by Committee introduced a meaningful alternative definition of uncertainty and modestly 
improved over pure uncertainty top-k selection.

However, it did not outperform diversity-aware uncertainty.

The diagnostic analysis suggests that this is not necessarily a failure of Query by Committee, 
but rather a consequence of low model disagreement on this particular EGFR dataset.

Next Hypothesis
Query by Committee may become more useful on targets with:

more balanced active/inactive distributions,

noisier activity landscapes,

lower baseline model performance,

or more heterogeneous chemical spaces.

This motivates extending the framework to multiple BindingDB targets before drawing general 
conclusions about acquisition strategy performance.



1/06/2026

Entry 12 — Target-Agnostic BindingDB Pipeline
Objective

Refactor the project from a single-target EGFR analysis into a reusable multi-target framework.

The goal is to make each target reproducible with one command:

python scripts/prepare_target.py --target EGFR
Master BindingDB Dataset

The full BindingDB TSV archive was cleaned and converted into a master parquet file.

Final cleaned dataset:

Records: 2,228,750
Targets: 8,614
Columns: 8
Active fraction: 0.629

The master table contains:

Target Name
Ligand SMILES
canonical_smiles
affinity_type
aff_nM_median
DG_median
n_meas
label
Target Registry

A target registry was introduced:

configs/targets.yaml

Each target now defines:

query
match
activity_threshold_nM

Example:

EGFR:
  query: "Epidermal growth factor receptor"
  match: "exact"
  activity_threshold_nM: 1000

This allows controlled target preparation using either exact or broader matching.

Target Preparation

The new target preparation pipeline creates:

data/processed/targets/<TARGET>/
├── clean.parquet
├── X_morgan.npz
├── y_classification.npy
├── descriptors.parquet
└── metadata.json

The .npz format is now used for compressed Morgan fingerprints.

EGFR Re-definition

The old EGFR benchmark used a smaller curated dataset:

750 molecules
active fraction ≈ 0.789

The new exact EGFR dataset from full BindingDB contains:

14,174 molecules
active fraction ≈ 0.647

This is a much broader and harder benchmark.

Effect on Results

The new EGFR benchmark produced lower ROC AUC values than the previous curated dataset.

This is expected because the dataset is:

larger,
less active-biased,
chemically broader,
and more realistic.

The previous EGFR benchmark was likely too easy for evaluating active learning strategies.

Panel Updates

The classification panel was updated to support target-agnostic loading.

Additional improvements:

reads from data/processed/targets/<TARGET>/;
supports compressed Morgan fingerprints;
includes target metadata;
uses UMAP init="random" to avoid spectral initialization warnings;
clips descriptor plot axes using the 99th percentile;
reduces background molecule opacity for readability;
supports the new larger EGFR dataset.
Directory Cleanup

The obsolete old EGFR folder was removed:

data/processed/EGFR/

Old BindingDB-EGFR figures and tables were archived.

The canonical structure is now:

data/processed/
├── bindingdb_clean_all.parquet
└── targets/
    └── EGFR/
Interpretation

This refactor changes the project scope.

The repository is no longer an EGFR-specific active-learning experiment.

It is now a reusable framework for preparing and benchmarking multiple BindingDB targets.

Next Step

Prepare additional targets from the same master parquet and compare active-learning behavior 
across different biological systems.

Key question:

Do acquisition strategies behave differently depending on the target, dataset balance, 
and chemical-space structure?


Entry 13 — Target-Specific Threshold Calibration
Objective
Make classification benchmarks more comparable across targets.

A fixed activity threshold, such as 1000 nM, does not produce equivalent classification problems for different proteins. Some targets become highly active-biased, while others remain more balanced.

Affinity Inspection Step
A new script was added:

Bash
￼
python scripts/inspect_target_affinity.py --target <TARGET>
For each target, the script reports:

affinity percentiles,

candidate activity thresholds,

active fraction at each threshold,

affinity type composition,

and an affinity distribution plot.

This step is now part of the standard target preparation routine.

EGFR Affinity Distribution
EGFR exact target:

￼
Molecules: 14,174
Median affinity: 255 nM
Threshold candidates:

￼
100 nM  → 42.3% active
500 nM  → 55.6% active
1000 nM → 64.7% active
Selected threshold:

￼
500 nM
Final EGFR benchmark:

￼
Molecules: 14,174
Active fraction: 0.556
JAK2 Affinity Distribution
JAK2 exact target:

￼
Molecules: 15,841
Median affinity: 72.7 nM
Threshold candidates:

￼
50 nM   → 44.1% active
100 nM  → 55.7% active
1000 nM → 79.8% active
Selected threshold:

￼
100 nM
Final JAK2 benchmark:

￼
Molecules: 15,841
Active fraction: 0.557
Why This Matters
Using a fixed 1000 nM threshold made JAK2 strongly active-biased.

After threshold calibration, EGFR and JAK2 now have nearly identical class balance:

￼
EGFR active fraction: 0.556
JAK2 active fraction: 0.557
This makes the active-learning comparison much fairer.

Updated Benchmark Results
With calibrated thresholds, the best-performing strategy on both targets was:

￼
uncertainty_diverse
EGFR:
Best ROC AUC ≈ 0.767

JAK2:
Best ROC AUC ≈ 0.779
Greedy selection still found the largest number of actives but produced worse ROC AUC, confirming that pure exploitation does not necessarily improve model learning.

Updated Routine
For every new target, the standard workflow is now:

Bash
￼
python scripts/prepare_target.py --target TARGET
python scripts/inspect_target_affinity.py --target TARGET
# update activity_threshold_nM in configs/targets.yaml if needed
python scripts/prepare_target.py --target TARGET
python scripts/run_bindingdb_repeated_simulation.py --target TARGET --seeds 10
python scripts/plot_bindingdb_classification_panel.py --target TARGET
Interpretation
The benchmark is now moving from a fixed-threshold classification problem to a target-calibrated classification framework.

This improves scientific comparability across biological targets and prevents misleading conclusions caused by target-specific affinity distributions.

Next Hypothesis
After calibrating thresholds, we can more fairly ask:

Does diversity-aware uncertainty consistently improve active learning across different biological targets?

Current evidence from EGFR and JAK2 supports this hypothesis.